Tutorial: Schemafull and Schemaless in SurrealDB (#572)
surrealdb/docs.surrealdb.com: doc-surrealdb_versioned_docs/version-1.x/tutorials/define-a-schema.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 6
sidebar_label: Define a Schema in SurrealDB
title: Define a Schema in SurrealDB | Tutorials
description: In this tutorial, you will learn how to define a schema in SurrealDB, what using either schema type means for data retrieval, and how to use what you need as your product grows.
---

# Define a Schema in SurrealDB

> When starting a new database project, there are a couple of early decisions to be made, such as creating tables and defining the records that will be in these tables and also the datatypes of the records, and how the tables you describe relate to each other which includes data sharing or manipulation.

Reviewer: Maybe change "and defining the records" to "and defining the fields" here.

> While this might look like many decisions, you are Defining a Schema.

Reviewer: Talking up the benefits of having a schema here, I assume? Maybe a change like this will work:

"you are Defining a Schema" -> "defining a schema is the primary way to ensure that your data behaves in the way you expect it to."

2. **Schemaless (Unstructured)**

When starting a new project in SurrealDB, you can define your Schema using either method depending on your application's requirements. Since SurrealDB is a multi-model database, you can have both in the same project, depending on your needs.

In this tutorial, you will learn how to define a schema in SurrealDB, what using either schema type means for data retrieval, and how to use what you need as your product grows.

## Prerequisites

Before you start, this guide assumes the following:

- Basic knowledge of databases and data modelling.
- SurrealDB is installed on your machine. You can download and install SurrealDB from the [installation page](/docs/surrealdb/installation/).
- [A Command line interface (CLI)](/docs/surrealdb/cli/sql) for interacting with SurrealDB or a [Surrealist sandbox](/docs/surrealist/#connecting-to-the-sandbox).

## Schemafull (Structured) Databases

A schemafull database requires the upfront definition of the structure of your data, including collections (tables) and fields (columns). This approach enforces consistency and integrity, making it suitable for applications with well-defined data models.

> In surrealDB, the Schemafull approach is usually associated with the [Define statement](/docs/surrealdb/surrealql/statements/define/), which is used to specify instructions to the Schema, such as authentication access and behaviour, global parameters, table configurations, table events, analyzers, and indexes. You can set a schemafull table in the following steps:

Reviewer: I think here I'd rephrase it a bit to emphasize that there are a lot of define statements and remove the word 'usually'. Something like this:

"In SurrealDB, the Schemafull approach is realized through Define statements that provide instructions on parts of your database such as authentication access and behaviour..."

### Creating a schemafull table

1. Define a Table: To start a schemafull table, specifically use the Define Table statement.

```surql
-- Create a schemafull user table.
DEFINE TABLE user SCHEMAFULL;
```

> 2. Define Fields:

Reviewer: Here I think it would be nice to mention why the DEFINE FIELD statements are used, that at this point you can't set any fields at all until you use them.

"Now that the table is schemafull, no fields can be set unless first defined through a DEFINE FIELD statement."

```surql
-- Define some fields.
DEFINE FIELD firstName ON TABLE user TYPE string;
DEFINE FIELD lastName ON TABLE user TYPE string;
DEFINE FIELD email ON TABLE user TYPE string;
  ASSERT string::is::email($value);
```

> In the code above you may notice the `ASSERT` clause. This can be used to validate any restrictions you want on a field. In the example above the [`string::is::email`](/docs/surrealdb/surrealql/functions/database/string#stringisemail) function is used to check whether the value is an email.

Reviewer: I think a link to the predefined variables page could work here for the curious reader:

...to check whether [the value](https://surrealdb.com/docs/surrealdb/surrealql/parameters#reserved-variable-names) is an email.

### Adding data to a Schemafull table

Now that you have defined all the fields needed, you can start populating them. To do this, you can use the [CREATE statement](https://www.notion.so/Schemaless-vs-Schemafull-2f60f2c00b0c409fa69d7200f779c8c5?pvs=21). For example, add a new user:

```surql
-- 1: Add a user with all required fields.
CREATE user CONTENT {
    firstName: 'John',
    lastName: 'Doe',
    email: 'JohnDoe@someemail.com',
};
```

This will return the data in an object. In the case where the email wasn’t a real email for example:

```surql
-- Using the CREATE statement to populate the table 
CREATE user CONTENT {
    firstName: 'John',
    lastName: 'Doe',
    email: 'JohnDoe.com',
};
```

The above will return an error because the field must conform to `string::is::email($value)` 

### Inserting fields that don’t exist in the schema

> In a schemafull table, since the fields need to be defined before you can populate them. If you add a field that doesn’t exist your data will be ignored. For example, in the user table you have only defined the `firstname` , `lastname` and `email` fields. If you introduce a `photoURI` field without defining the field in the `user` table it will return an error. 

Reviewer: Small change:

"populate them. If you add" -> "populate them, if you add"

```surql
-- Using the CREATE statement 
CREATE IC_directory:{username: 'johndoe',full_name: 'John Doe'} CONTENT {
	username: 'johndoe',
	full_name: 'John Doe',
	email: 'johndoe@example.com',
	date_of_birth: "1990-01-01",
	join_date: "2024-05-30",
	department: 'Engineering',
	role: 'Software Engineer',
	skills: ['Python', 'JavaScript', 'surql'],
	manager: manager_directory:janesmith,
	tags: ['full-time', 'remote']
};

-- Using the UPDATE statement 
UPDATE manager_directory:janesmith CONTENT {
	username: 'janesmith',
	full_name: 'Jane Smith',
	email: 'janesmith@example.com',
	date_of_birth: "1985-01-01",
	join_date: "2019-05-30",
	department: 'Engineering',
    role: 'Software Engineer Manager',
	skills: ['Python', 'JavaScript', 'surql'],
	report: IC_directory:{ full_name: 'John Doe', username: 'johndoe' },
	tags: ['full-time', 'remote']
};
```

> In the example above, you used the `CREATE` statement to make an `IC_directory` table and created an Object ID for this table. ID can be anything you want and is randomly generated if not defined. You have also used the UPDATE statement to make a `manager_directory`, which has `janesmith` as the ID. Learn more about [Record IDs in the documentation](/docs/surrealdb/surrealql/datamodel/ids#object-based-record-ids).

Reviewer: I think here we could rewrite the "ID can be anything you want..." sentence to this:

Record IDs can be specified by you [in a large number of formats](https://surrealdb.com/docs/surrealdb/surrealql/datamodel/ids), defaulting to a random UUID if you don't specify your own format for the ID.

And then could remove the final "Learn more about..." sentence since the link is now in the previous one.

> In the example above, you used the `CREATE` statement to make an `IC_directory` table and created an Object ID for this table. ID can be anything you want and is randomly generated if not defined. You have also used the UPDATE statement to make a `manager_directory`, which has `janesmith` as the ID. Learn more about [Record IDs in the documentation](/docs/surrealdb/surrealql/datamodel/ids#object-based-record-ids).

Author: ```suggestion
In the example above, you used the `CREATE` statement to make an `IC_directory` table and created an Object ID for this table. Record IDs can be specified by you [in a large number of formats](/docs/surrealdb/surrealql/datamodel/ids), defaulting to a random UUID if you don't specify your own format for the ID. . You have also used the UPDATE statement to make a `manager_directory`, which has `janesmith` as the ID. Learn more about [Record IDs in the documentation](/docs/surrealdb/surrealql/datamodel/ids#object-based-record-ids).
```

Notice how we have linked these two tables with the manager and report fields in the `IC_directory` and `manager_directory` tables, respectively.

You can also start defining a Schemaless table using the `DEFINE TABLE` statement.

```surql
-- Create schemaless user table.
DEFINE TABLE user SCHEMALESS;

-- Define some fields.
DEFINE FIELD firstName ON TABLE user TYPE string;
DEFINE FIELD lastName ON TABLE user TYPE string;
DEFINE FIELD email ON TABLE user TYPE string;
```

In the example above you have created a schemaless table using the `SCHEMALESS` clause. 

### Inserting fields that don’t exist in the schema

> Since a schemaless table doesn’t have any restrictions on the structure if you introduce a new field to an existing table the column will be added to the table even if other records don’t have the value. For example, take the schemafull example of introducing  a `photoURI` field without defining the field in the `user` table:

Reviewer: Here I recommend adding a bit of context about the table itself as defined (that there is strictness in the three fields but outside that it's completely free):

"The schemaless table above has strict definitions on three of its fields, but there are no restrictions on the rest of the table itself. As a result, if you introduce a new field to an existing table..."

```surql
CREATE user CONTENT {
    firstName: 'John',
    lastName: 'Doe',
    email: 'JohnDoe@someemail.com',
    photoURI: 'photo/yxCFi22Jw2.webp'
};
```

Since the `user` table is schemaless the `photoURI` field will be added for `John` without an error. 

## Combining Schemafull and Schemaless

> Now that you have seen how you can make a table in SurrealDB deciding what to go with depends on the restrictions you want to have on your Schema. 

Reviewer: Could be made into two sentences:

You have now seen how you can make a table in SurrealDB. Deciding what method to go with depends on the restrictions you want to have on your schema.

> Since SurrealDB is multi-model, If some tables require less restrictions you can make them schemaless and if you want to ensure that the structure remains the same for each entry then go with the schemafull option. 

Reviewer: As a multi-model database, SurrealDB allows tables requiring fewer restrictions to be schemaless, while also offering the schemafull option if you want to ensure that the structure remains the same for each entry.

### Use Case: Customer Relationship Management (CRM) System

A Customer Relationship Management (CRM) system is a prime example of an application that can benefit from both schemafull and schemaless tables. 

In this system, schemafull tables are essential for storing structured and consistent data such as customer details, orders, and products. 

For instance, a table for customers would include fields like customer ID, first name, last name, email, phone number, and the date they joined, ensuring data integrity and facilitating reliable reporting and analysis. 

Similarly, tables for orders and products would maintain strict schemas to track orders accurately and manage product inventories effectively. 

On the other hand, schemaless tables offer flexibility for handling unstructured or semi-structured data, which can vary widely. This is particularly useful for storing customer interactions such as emails, chat logs, phone call records, and social media messages, as well as customer feedback and reviews. 

These types of data do not fit neatly into a rigid schema due to their diverse formats and content. 

> By utilising both schemafull and schemaless tables, a CRM system can achieve a balance between maintaining reliable, structured data for critical operations and providing the flexibility to capture and analyse a wide range of customer-related information, enhancing the system's overall adaptability and functionality.

Reviewer: Good example to sum up the points learned during the tutorial.

## Conclusion

A schema is the structure of tables in your database. The most important consideration when deciding whether to use a schemafull, schemaless, or both approaches is how flexible you want the content to be. Choose schemafull tables for structured data with strict validation requirements. Use schemaless tables for flexible, dynamic data that might evolve.

Combine both approaches to leverage the strengths of each based on your application's needs.

> With respect to Performance Optimisation, you can use the `DEFINE INDEX` statement to create indexes on either form of table. This can also optimise storage and retrieval.

Reviewer: I would recommend moving this up a bit since it's a nice point to know and usually new points don't get introduced in a conclusion. At this point the reader might be starting to tune out and could miss it.

(Or introduce it further up and also keep it here in the conclusion to reiterate the point)

Author: Since this is not a requirement for defining a schema. Since it's more of a learning experience, I have left it here.
